From Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hansel minutes, our
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number 99. Recorded
live Wednesday, February 6th, 2008. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Tellerik already controls the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelerik.com. In this episode,
Scott talks with Mac developer,
Steven Frank. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes, and I'm
sitting here with Steven Frank from
panic. Panic makes macsoftware Steven
and I went to college
together, actually sat next to
each other in college and
bought our Newtons on opening
day. I remember we rushed
down to, he was an
incredible universe that they called
it. That's very incredible universe.
We spent a ridiculous amount
of money. I think it
was about the equivalent of
a term's worth of we're
early adopters. And we actually
convinced ourselves that we were
going to take notes in
class. I remember we tried
to like put together a
C code on the, in
the notepad and the Newton.
I really tried. I honestly
did. But do you still
have that Newton? I still
have a, not that one,
but I have kind of
a small collection of them
really like got nostalgic and
I bought one off eBay
and just like, remember the
good old times. And then
somehow that turned into like
four of them. Cause then
I had to have like
one of each model and
I don't know how it
is still to this day.
It's so fantastic that I've
got my Newton sinking with
outlook on my system. That's
great. Now we were in
a number of classes together
and if I remember correctly,
we were in windows, gooey
class. I think so. Yeah.
Now I work for Microsoft
and you co-founded a award-winning
Macintosh software company. Yes. Different
paths. Was that class a
part of it did, did
learning how to do hello
world in 93 short lines
of code and 16 windows
drive you away from the
mothership. Not really. I mean,
you got to understand that.
I was always like a
little bit alternative. Like, I
don't know if you know
this, but I was going
home and doing my homework
on my Amiga. I checked
didn't know that I had
suppressed that memory, but yes,
that's true. That was the
height of the Amiga. Yeah,
I mean, my, my first
real computer was an Apple
two and my dad got
like two 86 or three
86 at some point. And
I got an amigo was
like some money from my
first job and I was
really into that for awhile
and it kind of was
hoping like maybe it would
catch on and be a
big thing, but then it's
pretty much disappeared. It seems
like the Amiga was beta
max of, Of systems. I
mean, it was clearly superior
did amazing things with music
and graphics. Yeah. But it
didn't catch on Just didn't
catch on. I guess it
was from what I've heard.
It was kind of, you
know, the company was poorly
managed Commodore at the time
was like a lot of
executives taking a whole lot
of money and not putting
a lot of money in
what were was actually needed.
But yeah, it was kind
of very ahead of its
time. And certainly when it
came out and not a
lot of computers could do
the sorts of things it
could do. Now We were
in C class together and
you were at home coding
on your Amiga. So I
assume you started coding for
the Amica directly. That's right.
Well, I mean, everything for
class was, you know, pretty
generic kind of standard IO
kind of stuff. But I
did some gooey programming for
the Amiga. One of my
earliest jobs was very actually
a Portland based company that
was very small Amiga shopper
and then like two or
three people. And I wrote
a terminal emulator, you know,
basically for calling you're calling
up your BBSs Oh yeah.
For the Amiga. So that
was kind of my first
ever commercial software product. And
I guess when the Amiga
sort of disappeared, the Mac
was the next sort of
natural step for me because
I'd always kind of wanted
one. And when I got
together with cable, he actually
had an old one that
he let me use for
a while, while we were
getting rolling. And Is the
co other, the other co
founder of panic. That's right.
Gail Sasser. Okay. And you
guys have a number of
products and I really started
noticing you again, when you
started winning more and more
awards, you get these little
cubes from Steve jobs There,
I suppose that's one way
of looking at it. It's
called the Apple design award
and it's held at the
yearly worldwide developers conference that
Apple holds in San Francisco
now used to be San
Jose and there's multiple categories.
Things like best Machlis 10
user experience, best adoption of
technologies and the latest version
of Mecca 10 and you
know, things of that nature,
best student project, things like
that. Then you get the,
you get the cool little
cube award and you also
get some hardware usually with
that, like you get a
couple of Macs or a
couple of laptops or something
like that, which is great.
Cause you know, hardware's like
our number one expense here.
So How many of those
awards do you have? We
have, let's see, I think
we have five total. A
couple of them are our
runners up. Most recently we
got one for Coda at
last year's WWDC, which was,
I think for best macros
10 user experience. Okay. Coda
being our website IDE. Okay.
So let's talk about Coda.
So my listeners are mostly
windows people, although everyone is
a closet Mac head in
the sense that they've got
a Mac mini or they've
got a macular in the
house, I've got two Macs
at home and you know,
I'm actually doing some beta
testing of office 2008, which
is released now. I think
it just came out. Yeah.
And it's such a different
user experience, but I'm always
interested a developer's perspective about
understanding other ways to do
things. You know, I explore
Ruby and I look at
Python and I just, I
don't understand how you guys
are writing this stuff. So
Coda is a big full
fledged IDE, but you also
use componentry from other companies
that's right. CSS edit, and
then you pull in different
things. So I helped me
out, helped me understand Mac
development from like DNA up
til this afternoon because you
have a component model. How
do you have interprocess communication?
Is this all just in
see it's magic as far
as Well, most of the,
you mentioned the, the licensing
of code, there was a,
an, a text editor product
called Sabetha edit, which came
out years ago now on
the Mac. And it was
a collaborative text editing environment.
So you had multiple people
on the local network, all
editing the same document at
once. And it would update
on real time on everyone's
system. And that was, that
was a really interesting idea.
We talked to those guys
about licensing their engine because
it already did that collaboration
functionality, which we thought would
be really useful in an
IDE. And so we just
worked out sort of the
private deal with them to
share their source code with
us. And so it's, it's
not quite as componentized as
I would, like, we basically
have the source to their
application. And then we compile
into our project and bits
that we need. It's not
quite as glamorous as I
thought. I mean, if they,
they update their source where
that was, I'm sure that
they do, you're going to
have to do source level
DIFs. Yeah. We do a
lot of, of that type
of merging. And What kind
of, how do you share
stuff? I mean, if I
was going to write a
spellchecker or a, an, an
IntelliSense tool, that's going to
allow you to plug in
a new language in what
format does that look? What
does it look like? Well,
for, for collaboration and stuff,
we use subversion all of
their, almost all of our
code, like 98% of it
is an objective C. Okay.
But what I'm asking is
the, if I'm going to
make you a component, I
want to give you the
binary. Okay. So let's say
you could, in this version,
it's in, you know, you've
got your slash source, which
you've got slash live. I
give you a what, it's
not a DLL it's Live
or just, well, there, there
exists a thing called a
framework, which is either statically
or dynamically loadable, which would
be considered similar to a
DLL. You could do it
that way. We tend to
build our apps sort of
monolithically. So that everything's compiled
in except where we can't
do it for things like
the LGPL, where we're required
to dynamically load. Oh, okay.
So give me an example
of an LGPL thing that
would stay out of your
application and sit next to
it rather than inside it
What's in there. I think
a neon for example, is
in there, we do, neon
is in an LGPL library
for doing web dev connections,
which we use in both
Coda and transmit, transmit to
your FTP client. That's right.
And so one of the
terms of the LGPL is
that you have to be
able to provide the source
to any modifications That you
make to it. And you
can, by not statically linking
it with your application, you
can provide just the modifications
to the library itself and
not the whole, your whole
application. You don't have to
give out the source for.
So that's, that's one thing
that we compile into a
dynamically loaded bundle or framework
as it's called. Okay. When
you use those from code,
once they're loaded, they don't
look any different. I mean,
you can, you don't have
to go hunting for PreK.
I remember when we were
doing this things, we would
load librarian, get proc address,
you'd find entry points and
you have basically dot H
files describing what's in that
thing over there. Right. Do
you have that experience too?
Not really. Once, once the,
once the bundles loaded into
the main application it's available
and you can just call
into it, like you had
any other classes. Okay. So
this is a real common
thing. So bundles are a
very common way for people
to have a component model
from, from place to place.
Now, are those typically loaded
out of the same folder
as the application? Or is
there a central store for
those things? Well, there's two
ways you can do it.
The there's sort of a
global library folder, which contains
things like the WebKit framework,
for example, which is safaris,
this fiery web browsers rendering
engine, The rendering engine kind
of comes with the iOS
that's right. So it's kind
of like the way that
internet Explorer there was that
whole lawsuit. And they said,
Oh, internet Explorer. It comes
with the iOS, but for
us, it's a thing called
shell Schaldach view. And it's
like the thing that renders
HD, Right. It's over there.
And it was associated with
the entire system. That's right.
Yeah. It's installed in the,
in the system library. Okay.
So I can use that
in my application. I don't
have to worry that it's
not there Always be there.
Right. You don't know necessarily
what version will be there.
You know, you usually look
at, you can look at
things like the top level
iOS version, you know, who's
at 10.4 10.5, but there
can also be interim updates
to Safari in that time
that will update the web
framework. Okay. So there's, there's
those libraries that are shared.
And then there's a user
level library folder where you
can install things like that
into, but it's not a
great idea to do so,
because then you, you end
up with, you know, dependency
problems and things like that.
And it's just generally something
Mac users don't want to
worry or care to think
about. And so the other
option is you can embed
the framework into the application
directly. And this is kind
of the interesting thing about
the application framework on Mac
iOS 10 is the it's
at its root. It's just
a folder structure. So you
have, like, in our case,
our application Coda has a
root folder called coda.app, which
is displayed to the user
as a single icon. The
little leaf says code underneath.
So this thing about directories
is really interesting to me
because when I go into
the finder, which is like
the windows Explorer, and I
see an icon that says
Coda, it's a leaf, I
guess, right? That's a lie.
It's really a folder called
coda.app. Well, I wouldn't say
it. I'll say it's a
lie. It's a bad thing
because we do the same
thing in, in the windows
world. There's a thing called
an explore, a namespace extension
where you're going around folder,
folder, folder, and then you
see a folder that's a
special kind of folder and
you go in it and
you basically get a pair
of Rose colored glasses over
reality because reality is just
not relevant. Well, it's only
a life you consider each
icon representing a single thing.
Do you know what I
mean? Like, there's still, it's
one icon representing this, this
concept of an entire application.
So double clicking on it
runs it, it doesn't go
in there. That's right. Okay.
And I'm trying to figure
out how I remember, Or
maybe lie is not the
right way to put. What
I'm saying is that it's,
if you put.app on the
end of something, does it
automatically get turned into an
icon? Sort of, it'll probably
get very confused if it's
not, not actually in this,
There's some kind of action.
There's a manifest of some
kind and there's it's let
me say this rather than
a lie. It's a convention.
Yeah. But it's a time
trusted convention. When did it
begin with OSTP 10? Yes.
Yeah. I believe it, it
comes from the next step
origins of him. Yeah. I
remember playing with next steps
in high school, but I
don't remember ever getting into
that detail about how it
actually worked. Yeah. Okay. So
when you drag, when, when
I get a, when I
download something from a Mac
shower site, I get a
DMG file. A disc image,
like an ISO, right? Usually,
yeah. I open it up.
I see an icon. I
drag the icon into the
applications folder. Was it, was
it really an icon or
was it just moving one
folder to another folder? Yeah.
That was literally a directory
copy from the, from the
read only disc image into
your applications folder. So on,
on windows, we're always running
installed installers. Yes. And we're
putting, you know, we're changing
the registry, which is a
central storage location and we're
laying files down, but we're
also checking to make sure
shared libraries are available. How
would an application in the
Mac world do those things
As, as a general rule,
we're very anti installer. I,
for one, it annoys me
greatly. If an app requires
an installer and it doesn't
actually need one, like some
companies will, who kind of
don't know what they're doing
with Mac development will they'll
build their app and then
they'll put it in an
installer and it doesn't need
one. You just copy it
off the, you just drag
it off into the applications
folder, and that's all you
need to do. But there
are exceptions to that thing
with like drivers specifically would
have to be copied. They're
usually in the form of
kernel extensions, and those have
to be copied to a
specific folder to make them
work. What's a kernel extension
in this context eats, You
know, it would be something
like a driver for a
Wacom tablet or Kernel extension
in the context of Linux
and Mac iOS is something
that runs a wink at
ring zero, Basically. Yeah. Okay.
It's literally loading into the
kernel and providing some extra
support for hardware or whatever.
And are those the kinds
of things that can crash
Mack? Yeah. Those will get
you into like kernel and
the only real hard kinds
of crap. I can tell
Colonel panic. That's like our
blue screen Basically. Yeah. You
see it? I don't know
if you've ever seen one
on your, on your mini,
but I got a sad
Mac once. Oh really? Oh,
that's kernel. Panic is like
the whole screen darkens and
you see a message in
every language that is supported
by Mexico. Yeah. Yeah. I
did get that Japanese and
Chinese and the whole thing.
Oh, okay. That's okay. Yeah.
That means something really bad
happened. I must have plugged
something in. Okay. So anyway.
Yeah. And in terms of
checking for dependencies and things
like that, usually if there's
something really special, you need,
you just, you would either
bundle it into your application.
Well, let me ask you
this. Go back to WebKit.
So you were saying that
you might want to use
that library make that, that
service, that system level service
was to be available, but
maybe you really want a
certain version of that and
you don't have it again.
What do you do? Well,
what I'd probably do is
check for it at runtime.
Okay. And then that gives
you the opportunity to pop
up a, you know, a
nice explanatory, like I need
this version of Safari to
be installed or I can't
run, and then you send
them off to go get
it. Right. But that rarely
happens Because it seems like
Mac applications say we work
on this dot release MOS
10. Yeah. Full-stop yeah. And
like on the windows world
and I'm juxtaposing, not in
a, I'm not intending for,
to talk windows up or
talk back down, we're just
juxtaposing the windows world. There,
there are times when we'll
say this app only supports
Vista and there are very
rare, but a few apps
where they only support like
this to service pack one,
I think it's 5.2 or
something like that. Vista has
a number underneath it. That's
the real number two, but
most often windows users really
want compatibility. Cause you've got
like windows 95 people out
there. Right. So in my
world, we're always talking about
how can I get this
application to run in the
month 95, 98,000 Mac users.
It seems like you guys
are more relaxed about that.
And if it doesn't run
on  well, I'll just
upgrade it to ten five. Why
is that? Is it Some
reason Mac uses are very,
I won't say early adopters,
but they are, there don't
seem to be very afraid
of upgrading to the latest
version of it. Haven't been
burned by the upgrades. No,
not really mostly work. Right?
Yeah. I mean, I upgraded
to leopard, right. That's 10
point 0.5 and you know,
everything pretty much worked. I
lost classic mode, so I
can't run my old applications
anymore. Right. A kid picks
was a canvas, the casualty
of that. Oh really quite
a bummer. But I did,
I looked around the net
and it wasn't like a
lot of people were up
in arms about the loss
of kid picks is Right.
Most people by now I
think have gotten replacements for
all of their, their classic
apps. And they're pretty much
done with it. Okay. Very
progressive bunch. Except for, of
course, Newton users who are
still Desperately trying to use
the connection utilities. That's true.
Okay. So, so back to
the structure. So there's Coda
has coded.app and there's a
directory. And then there is
that as far as the
convention goes, or is there
a convention for things living
inside that directory? No, there's
a there's convention for basically
the whole structure of that
folder. So within that you
have, there's usually a folder
called contents, which I think
is sort of vestigial. Cause
it's usually like the first
and only thing in the
top level. And then within
that contents folder, you'll have
the actual binary for the
application. You'll have a thing
called the info dot P
list, which is a property
list file, which is basically
XML or like a binary.
So this is a formalized
metadata kind of a sidecar
along for the ride. Yeah.
It says sort of, here's
the name of the app?
Here's the, the copyright information,
you know, here's the path
to the execute. It didn't
these used to be in
what they called the resource
stream. Maybe I'm using my
Mac terms wrong, but I
seem to remember that the
files had multiple streams within
one place file forks forks.
There you go. That resource
fork. Thank you.  Separate
files. It's kind of an
obsolete now, but that was
the MapQuest file system, which
called the HFS supported this
notion of forked files. So
you have a single file,
again, a single icon that
has multiple forks on disc.
So you would, it would
typically be yes to the
data fork and the resource
fork. And in the very,
very early days, like, you
know, original black and white
Mac, pretty much everything would
be resource based like your,
your compiled binary code would
be in a code resource,
your menu layouts and your
UI layouts would be in
other different types of resources.
Your fonts would be in
there, but it kind of
created a world of pain
when, when dealing with other
OSS, cause you would have
to find a way to
collapse these two different sections.
I was always running Mac
opener and I find what
I thought was one file
was two or three. Yeah.
And that's kind of a
bit of legacy Mac voodoo.
That's not real common anymore.
You still occasionally see things
with a resource for ironically,
usually the, the bigger development
houses, Microsoft and Adobe you'll
you'll sometimes see them sort
of cause they have so
much code to, to migrate
to the, towards what, the
way things are working now
that it, it takes them
a while to get there.
But it's, I think most
everyone is, is moved away
from that now, which is
I think a good thing.
So is the result of
your build? I mean guys,
do you have daily builds
and is the result of
your build this directory structure?
For some of our, our
applications, we do have a,
like a Cron process that
runs nightly and spits out
a new build. And yeah,
the output is, is, is
the.app. And how do you
look in there? I mean,
you have to get the
development STK to say, I
don't want you to look
like an icon right now.
I need to be poking
around in here for debugging
purposes. You can actually do
it with the regular finder.
If you a control, click
on an icon and say,
show package contents. So control,
click show, package contents. And
that takes the glasses off
and I'll see reality to
open it. Like it's a
regular phone or do that
immediately. Okay. Poker, but that's,
and that's also where inside
that, inside that directory bundle,
you also have things like
loadable frameworks and things like
that. So if you have
like something equivalent to a
DLL and you want to
package it in with your
application so that when the
user drags that icon into
the application, solar comes along
for the ride. So it
just, it's sort of a,
a standardized way of just
packaging, an executable and all
of its dependent resources. And
two really interesting transitions have
happened in the last couple
of years in Mac. The
first was the introduction of
Intel, which seemed to go
very smoothly. And then there
was the introduction of 64
bit. And in both of
these instances, it doesn't seem
like, you know, my mom
and those kinds of users
has really sweated it. What
are the kinds of things
that, that made that possible?
And what are the things
that didn't work that were
actually very painful from a
developer's perspective? Because there was
this power PC to Intel,
which I assume it was
new compilers and new libraries
and new everything. And some
things worked and some things
didn't. And then now I
understand that 10.5 and 64
bit, there must be a
third two-bit thunking layer and
there must be some 32
bit processes that are running
Well to, to get back
to the CPU for a
second. The it's interesting. This
is actually the second. If
you think about it, CPU
architecture change that the Mac
has had being the first
being 68,000 series to power
PC. So kind of been
around that block once already.
And they came up with
some, you know, creative stuff
there. And the in, even
before that, if you go
way back, there was a
switch to, from 24 bit
to 32 bit addressing, which
broke all the apps that
were like, Hey, we could,
you know, store extra stuff
in this, in this bite.
So yeah, the thing about
the CPU architecture changes that
we've, we've actually done this
once before with the 68,000
to the power PC. And
so we kind of been
around this block a little
bit and they came up
with lots of, of creative
tricks, you know, to, to
get us up and running
on power PC and broke
everyone who was, you know,
trying to store data in
the extra bite of their
24 bit addresses. And Was
that a painful time? I
mean, from the user's point
of view, did I assume
things got, worked out, but
as a developer, just things
fell apart. Everything had mostly
gone to power PC by
the time I came along.
So I didn't catch too
much of that, but there
was still a lot of
transition. Even at that time,
they were getting rid of
the, the traditional Mac TCP
stack and moving to something
called open transport that was
all stream based. And so
a lot of people were
having to bridge their network
code depending on whether you
had MC TCP or open
transport loaded, Oh God, this
is, this is also long
ago, pain, so pain. But
then recently your company had
to deal with the transition
from power PC to Intel
though. Yeah. So as the,
as the owner of a
company, when that happens, it's
like, okay, here's how it's
here's what's coming down. Everyone
was, was pretty nervous when
it was announced, because I
was like, wow, that sounds
like a big change and
know and all that. And
what they did was they
started out by shipping everyone
sort of a, what they
call the transition developer kit,
which was very early, like
Cro-Magnon until Mac that would,
was running a Mac iOS
10 built on Intel. And
what, the first thing that
was immediately noticeable was that
it all just worked like
it, wasn't doing weird crashy
things. And it was just
MapQuest 10 with a different
CP, Which is kind of
indifferent Indianness, which, I mean,
people can't overestimate and DNS
will bite you. Oh yeah.
Depending on how you start
it. Yeah. And so that
was the most impressive thing
was it just ran like
it did on PRPC in
terms of the OSTP and
there wasn't really any, you
know, if you had sat
the Mac user down in
front of it, they wouldn't
have known anything was, was
different really, other than it
was a bit faster. That's
the magic of Crohn's compilation.
I mean, C is a
portable language. And as long
as you think about, I
mean, I've done, I've done
C programming on the Palm
pilot, which I think was
a 68,000 at the time,
probably I ran into Indian
this when I was doing
my shareware license keys. Right.
I generated them on my
PC, had to confirm them
on my, on my Palm
pilot and it didn't work.
Yup. And it was all
written in C on both
sides. Then I said, Oh,
you know, if big Indian
yep. Do this exactly a
little if deaf and you
were cool. Was that what
it was new compilers? And
some if deaths That was
kind of, it, it was
surprisingly painless. Like there were
a few Indian things and
I think they were serial
numbers for us as well.
Really. Yeah. I mean, how
many times do you have
to think about things in
terms of, and Never really,
I mean, you know, we
deal with a lot of
network code and there's, there's
such thing as network abide
order, which is, you know,
things are done a certain
way there. And so we
didn't have to worry about
that. Our stuff's not real
CPU intensive for the most
part. So there wasn't a
lot of mathematical algorithms that
we had to that were
hand optimized assembler or anything
like that. It was, we
mostly just called into the,
into the API is, and
I think if you did
that, everything mostly went. Yeah.
And the same thing happened
on the poem. The poem
changed from one CPU to
another. I think they went
from a six to 8,000
to a small arm processor
and, and I wasn't playing
well, I was writing directly
to video memory and I
paid the price. Well, all
my friends in the poem
community were writing to the
API APIs. And that's really
it. I mean, when you're
doing your writing, any kind
of a kid support those
public API APIs and things
will usually work out. Yeah.
They always tell you, you
know, use the API is
don't touch the hardware and
you're like, yeah, I go,
whatever, I'll touch the hardware.
And then there's something like
this eventually comes along. So
what about the 32 to
four bit transition? I'm not,
I'm not probably the best
person in the world to
talk about it since my
64 bit experience is kind
of limited. Oh, you're running
tight. You're running leopard. Yep.
And you're running it on
a core two duo. Yep.
And did this, does the
OSTP support letting you know
whether or not a process
is running 64 bit or
not? I believe the way
it's managed is the same
way that you can ship
an app that runs on
both power PC and Intel,
and that's done through what
they called the fat binary.
Ah, this is this universal
binary that everyone was shipping.
Right. Exactly. And they were
complaining that Adobe wasn't stepping
up and shipping universal binary
versions of stuff. Right. It
was not until CS three
came out that Adobe was
shipping. An Intel native version
of Was he as three,
his creative suite, Creative suite
three, which is Photoshop and
illustrator. So a universal binary
is just more of the
same, this.app thing where you
have a hidden folder. And
then they just had two
versions, one for power PC,
and one for Intel. It
basically compiles twice. It compiles
once targeting power, PC compiles,
once targeting Intel. And then
at the end it runs
a program that basically just
kind of glued them together
into one binary. And then
the loader, when you launch
your app will knows what
architecture is running on, obviously,
and loads the correct binary.
That's interesting that they have
the convention for having this,
this folders and the.app thing.
But rather than having side-by-side
binaries, they actually melted them
together into one. Yeah. That
is kind of interesting. Cause
it seems like there's, there's
an allowance in the, in
the folder structure to have
multiple wineries. And like there
is actually like a macro
S folder within that, that
seems like, Oh, you could
have sub folders and they
didn't, I'm not sure why
they didn't go that route.
I'm sure there's probably maybe
a performance reason, but, And
it has had there been
problems where you've debugged the
system only on the power
PC version. Well, they, I
mean, during the transition, it
was hard to cause you
would kind of also have
to do testing on both
platforms. And so it was
kind of a chore and
every once in a while
we'd miss something. But, but
yeah, they're, there are separate
and distinct binaries that have
been compiled, you know, differently.
So for the most part,
those things just work. Yeah.
And I think 64 bit
is works more or less
the same way. So there's,
there's a 32 bit and
64 bit version of the
system frameworks, the system API
APIs. And then it dynamically
loads, your, your 64 bit
version, if you have one
and dynamically links it to
the 64 bit version of
the API. And is that
something that like Coda and
your different applications have done
yet? Or are you still
32? I think as far
as I know we were,
we're still 32 bit on
our apps cause they're not
very compute. So unless you
need piles of memory and
people don't really care right
now on the, on the
PC side, you know, the.net
programmers do everything, talking to
an intermediate format, like, like
a byte code, like a
Java byte code it's called
intermediate language. So we
write C-sharp or VB or
whatever iron Python and it
compiles to this IRL, which
is then jetted by either
a 64 bit or 32
bit jitter. So we don't
think about it either, but
we only ship the one
thing, but we have a
flag that you can Mark.
And you can say this
executable is just 32 bits
or this one's just 64
or this one's any CPU.
And the CPU flag is
that kind of magic bit.
You do that. I see
you ship your XC and
it gets jetted just in
time. And then lined up
with two different versions. Like
you said, Versions of the
framework. So that's like your
universal binary. Yeah, exactly. So
the, the fact that it's
not really machine code is
the compilation. Let me put
it this way. The compilation
step that you speak of
where you have to compile
two versions that is left
to the user's computer to
do that at the load
time. And then it spins
off. But we get nailed
when, for example, a 64
bit process might accidentally called
down into them some 32
bit Fang. And I see
it's good. It's called P
invoking. We're basically we're, we're
living in this a higher
level of abstraction. And as
soon as we decided to
break, the fourth wall started
poking around. Then you get,
then you get hurt. Now,
if you, if you, if
you guys were in the
business of doing drivers, I
assume you'd have to be
thoughtful about what was going
on in the kernel. And
there'll be 64 bit drivers
in three days With drivers.
Yeah, I imagine so we've
never, never gone down that
road, but For the app
developer you're just using, is
it X code and objective
C that's your primary developer
Environment. That's right. Yeah. X
code is an IDE that
Apple provides that does basically
everything. So it's like visual
studio it's at the Apple
visual studio. Yeah. In a
way. Yeah. And so then
people that are writing desktop
Mac applications, they use X
code. Do they use anything
else or is it almost
always It's pretty much always
excode there, there aren't any
real alternatives to it yet,
which is kind of odd.
I guess the, the market
is so small that no,
one's really seen a, you
know, a financial opportunity there.
I mean, you could also
go sort of a classic
Unix route and have something
with a make file and
you know, and do your
editing in a whatever editor
you want. But yeah. But
most people don't use code
just cause it's all nice
one place. Yeah. So it's
got the momentum, it sounds
like visual studio in that
context. I mean, they're all
alternatives, but yeah, The big
compiler, it used to be
code warrior and then Mac
was 10 came along and
it kind of sort of
killed code warrior because they
just weren't ready for it.
And yeah. Yeah. Metro works
code where I did all
my Palm work. Really. Yeah.
I love that. Yeah. That
was a good idea. Yeah.
It was fine. I don't
know if they still exist
for a while. They switched
to just doing like embedded
stuff only like Polman and
things like that. Yeah. I
mean they were, they really
were targeting the processor at
that point. Yeah. So yeah,
when the processor market changed
from Mac, they went away.
So when I hear objective
C I think low level
and I think I'll get
it. See, and what, you
know, what kind of point
D referencing must even have
to deal with every day?
Is this, this ignorance on
my part? I'm sure. Objective
C is real interesting. Cause
your first reaction is to
look at it and sort
of run screaming because there's
like these brackets everywhere. And
I know that was my
reaction and, but I've over
time, like really come to
enjoy it. And it's, it's
like one of my favorite
languages now. And all it
is, is straight C with
a little bit of an
extra syntax layer. So it
gives you an object model
and it gives you things
like, you know, all the
things that you would expect
from an object oriented language.
And interestingly enough, leopard introduces
objective C two, which is
so I should back up
objective C has it's it's
it's the language, but there's
also the runtime, which is
a crucial component. Cause it's
a very dynamic, There's the
B to C and the
C runtime that you always
have a C run time
on whatever platform you're targeting.
Right. So you have the
objective C one time, which
is I'm sure all of
that plan. Right. And that's
what handles like, you know,
here's these classes that are
available. And when you, when
you send a message to
a class and like figuring
out what the actual, you
know, who it gets sent
to and all that good
stuff. So that's the objective
see around time and in
leopard that was revved to
support things like garbage collection
and some other kind of
nice additional things. You can
make a string and don't
worry about D referencing it
later. You don't have to
go Malak running free. Right.
Right. Generally the, the, the,
historically the method has been
that you, you, you, you
would have like an object
called my object and you
would say my object, alloc
knit. And so alloc does
the, essentially the Malak and
then a knit sets it
up with its initializes, the
variables, and Right. So then
C plus plus, you know,
you make your class, your
new class and then the
constructor happens. It's implied. Exactly.
Is this objective C or
is this objective C plus
plus There's both. I don't
know anyone who uses objective
C plus plus, but I
think it's mainly if you
have existing C plus plus
code that you want to
make, run in an objective
SeaWorld Using structure classes. I
mean, can you, can structures
have behavior, No strikes or
just regular C strikes you
objective C has its own
class concepts that it uses.
And it's all very dynamic.
So you can do like
goofy things like swapping out
one class for another, at
runtime and having one class
poses, another class and various
tricks like that, depending on
how deep of a hole
you want to dig your
studio, Two interfaces. Do you
like to find an interface
and say that any one
of these three guys will
implement that interface? So any
of them are suitable for
plugable componentry like a sub
sub classical type of not
subclass in the, in the
abstract base class. Since like,
I mean, you could go
and say public class person
and then derive tall guy,
short guy, or I'm thinking
more public interface. I person
where I accept anyone who
has this message signature, this
method signature. If you, if
you're an object and you
have first name and last
name, as far as I'm
concerned, you're a person. And
that's cool. Yeah. You could
do something like that. In
fact, if you want you,
if you want, you can
even go a little lower
than that. You can say,
does this object respond to
this message? And if so,
I want to send it
this message. It's actually distantly
derivative from smalltalk, which is,
and kind of related languages
along the way, like self
and this concept of objects
and sending messages to objects,
but in a very dynamic
way. So things are not
very, Yeah, that sounds very
kind of Ruby ass, because
then you can go and
say, you know, method missing
where you'll say, I'm the
handler for any objects that
this object does, any messages,
this object doesn't know how
to understand. Yeah. You could
do something like that. Or
a lot of times there's
a concept of a delicate
object, especially in the, in
the user interface. Like the,
the, the embeddable web view
is an, is a traditional
example of that. You'd say
you stick this, okay. This
is the view class. So
it's going to be view
things, only, not model things.
And then you say, okay,
but this view has delegates.
And like, it might have,
for example, a policy delicate,
which is when someone clicks
on a link that opens
in a new window, what
should I do? You know?
And then that's sort of
a callback in a sense,
Okay, let's just go let's.
So let's bring this full
circle. Cause we were talking
about the WebKit, which is
the Apple, you know, HTML
renderer. So I'm going to
write an application and I
go into X code and
go file new project, and
I'm gonna make a new
Apple application. And I want
to use the web kit.
And I bring this, I
get this on, on the,
on the form, somewhere in
the dialogue, my resources, The,
the perms interface builder, which
is the, the UI. So
you have, you have a
separate kind of resource fork.
That's not, that's not the
right word, but dialogues are
described in a declarative way.
Right. And you know, there's
a visual editor called interface
builder that generates what's it
called nib files. I think
it comes from next interface,
stability. I've landed on Mars,
nib files. And it's just,
it's a toy. It's so
interesting to learn about other
cultures. And so I want
to basically make a web
browser. So I put a
couple of buttons on there.
They're my buttons, not, not
WebKit buttons, but the WebKit
white area that says HTML,
we'll go here, put in
a text box. Do I
wire up events? And I
say, you know, when I
hit go grab the Earl
out of that text box
and tell WebKit to go
get it. Yeah, Yeah. You
can do the codeless, a
web browser by essentially connecting
the, the textbox to the
web view and saying when
this text is entered, use
it as the rule And
I'm sending messages at this
point. Yeah. It will. The,
when you update the text
field, it will send a
message to the, to the
web view to really, I
get a codeless Like you
did. COVID okay. So the
interface builder knows enough about
the messages that these various
components provide. That's right. And
they're properties that I can
line them up for anything.
Yep. And it's certainly when
you need to get fancier
that you start to add,
you know, code in there
for you. So you're grinning
with means that codeless just
like with Microsoft, it's a
fun demo, but it really
quickly doesn't work and you
gotta get into the real
work It's for a surprising
number of things. But yeah.
To get into any real
nitty gritty, you're gonna have
to add some goat at
some point. There's a real
interesting new concept that actually
started one version prior to
leopard on tiger, which is
called bindings, which was the
sense that, okay, we have
all of these model objects
that are kind of standardized
system level things. Right. And
we have these views, which
are system standard, but we
don't have any sort of
standard controller layer. And so
the notion of bindings was
to say, it's a, it's
a notification system. So a
model can say I changed
my value. And then all
the views that are listening
to that model automatically hear
that and update themselves and
go the other way. If
someone changes the view, it
sentence propagates, all that information
back to the model. I'm
trying to, I'm trying to
find parallels because we've got
things there's so many different
ways to pass messages. I
mean, with all OSS, there's
like a half dozen different
ways with mail slots or
pipes or whatever, you know,
God knows what's going on,
which gets me thinking about
backward compatibility because one of
the things, and don't take
this the wrong way. I
mean, I've known you long
enough that you won't be
offended, but it just seems
like, and I thought this
before I worked for Microsoft
and now I think it
even more that it really
bugs me when people get
mad, when we're going to
yank support for windows 95
or windows 2000, because those
things, what does it mean
five is 13 years old.
And I feel that we
should be able to yang,
you know, and I'm sure
we've yet. I don't know
what the support life cycle
is. And should we be
getting support for that? But
Mac users don't seem to
get too mad when you
yank something out from under
them. That's only a couple
of years old. It is
interesting. You do. I mean,
as a Mac person who
really could care less about
windows, you do see the
hypocrisy in that. I do.
Yeah. And it's not just
software. Like when the IMF
came out, it had no
floppy drive. Oh my God.
Yeah. It has no floppy
drive. What are we going
to do? Like everyone freaked
out about the iMac, having
no floppy drive. It has
made absolutely no difference. Well,
another freaking out because the
MacBook air has no optical.
Right. And no ethernet general.
Well, that's definitely. Yeah. And
it's one of those things
that there's a level of
like, Oh my God, what
are we going to do?
And then I think over
time, people find out that
it's really not that necessary.
And, but, you know, to
get back to more the
software side of things. Yeah.
They have been very aggressive
about dropping backwards compatibility. I
mean, we went from the
classic versions of Mac iOS
went up to eight and
the nine, and then there
was this, well, there was
a transition to power PC
there, which for the most
part worked, your applications would
just work. And then this
massive switch to Mac was
10 and completely different universe.
You know, What were you
running in 2000? What was
the Mac world running in
the, in the year, 2000,
2000. That was like right
in the middle of that.
Okay. So if I'm running
Mac iOS 10, Oh yeah.
Right now, which would be
like windows 2000. Do I
get any love in the
Mac community or do I
have no, there's no sympathy
for me. No. Basically nothing
will, will run on here
except probably what came with
dos. But I, I mean,
we, we survey our users
from time to time. We
have like a, you know,
an optin we'll send, you
know, collect stats or whatever,
and there's zero people running
that costs us 10.0. It's
the current version. And one
version back accounts for probably
about 95%. Right. And this
reminder version. So there's two
there's 10, five and 10,
four, 10, four windows saying
it will only work on
Vista service pack one and
Vista and everyone else is
screwed. Kind of people have
petitions like save XP. I
just, I think, I guess
it's because they're so big.
I mean, there's businesses. Like
I always use this canonical
example, which is the, I
don't know if this guy
really exists. Cause I've been
talking about this theoretical, the
chief architect of the Nebraska
department of forestry. This is
my, my prototype guy. And
he's the guy who's got
like, you know, windows 98
machines running access that have
important data that it's fundamental
to his business. And I
always wonder he doesn't want
to upgrade cause he doesn't
want to mess anything up.
I always wonder if there's
the same Mac guy out
there. I'm the system, seven
guy who's running Phi units
running like a HyperCard and
all his data is there.
And if he upgrades, it'll
be over, We hear from
them from time to time.
But they percentage wise as
far as we can tell
there, they're very small minority.
Yeah. Well, now that you
guys, let me say, you
guys and Mac folks have
gone from like 3% to
like, what is it? 12
or 13%, At least 10.
I think now I don't.
And do you think this
is going to bite Steve
in the butt when there
are many millions of people
who are not really interested
in? Well, this is the
thing I was thinking about
windows over lunch today is
that they, you know, you've,
you've still got, I think
in the, in the properties,
dialogue, you know, options for
dusk compatibility mode and all
this stuff. Cause he knows
somebody is like, horrible. Well
even on Vista you can
run VisiCalc. Yeah. Like someone's
terrible point of sale. DOS-based,
you know, thing is going
to break if they get
rid of that. And I
don't know what you do
about that. If you're Microsoft,
we suffered here, you're stuck.
I mean, totally sucks. Which
is interesting. And I guess
that is, you know, to
a point a function of
market share. And I, I
just, I'm glad I don't
have to be the one
who has to decide the
path forward. Not yet. I
mean, I just think that
at some point people won't,
won't take it anymore. Yeah.
At some point Mac will
get big enough or open
to or whatever. And it's
just, someone's going to get
mad and they're going to
say, no, we want support.
I mean, if you think
about it, it's people want
it both ways. They want
to be able to run
every program they've ever written.
That's ever been written all
the time, but they also
don't want to crash. Yeah.
Everything has to just work
out of the box. All
drivers should magically just work.
Yeah. You can't win. Like
there's this game right now.
I don't know if you
guys have this on the
Mac it's called crisis. So
I don't think so. The
guys that made far cry
very, very high end game.
So this is not just
a high end game. This
is a game that was
sent back by Sarah Connor
for the future. You know,
it's like some theory. It
literally runs on theoretical hardware.
Nice, nice. I mean, I
have a quad proc. Wow.
I have a quad proc
machine, you know, God's own
video card and I've got
like a little cart, a
little SLI thing going between
the two video cards. So
they can work together as
a team. And I still
drop frames on this game.
Wow. And people are complaining.
Wow. You know, and of
course time will pass. It'll
get, the hardware will happen.
And then we'll go, how
did we ever live without
this kind of hardware? My
dad's got a quad proc
machine. He can't get anything
done. Yep, exactly. But gosh,
yeah, we should talk again
sometime about things like, like
multi-core and what that means
and how objective C's and
deal with that. Because we're
doing some really interesting things
where you could take like
a four loop and add
a parallel keyword and then
it'll just magically work across
multiple. Oh, that's cool. You
know, approx, I'm going to
be interested to see like,
I'm sure you would have,
you have multiple threads and
you have to deal with
multithreading and stuff like that.
But yeah. Threads usually automatically
branch off into their own
CPS, but I've not seen
anything. That's like the four
loop level. That's pretty cool.
Well, thanks for, for letting
me come down to visit
panic headquarters, Steven Franklin. No problem.
And this has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see you again next week.